# 1.0.2 Data Governance

Data governance is the standards and policies that you use to manage data through its whole life cycle - from initial data generation to obsolescence. It encompasses how you store it, back it up, and dispose of it.

## Data Organization
In any project, whether it be a bioinformatics project or writing a book - organization matters. I'm sure you've all seen someone's desktop that is completely full of files and links - so disorganized that it's hard to find anything. You don't want your project to get disorganized.  So, it's key to setup some organization schema before the project even begins.

Look at the two scenarios:

Scenario #1 - A folder for Everything

```
Project/
├─ Seq1
├─ Seq
├─ Analysis
├─ Script2.py
├─ Script2Final.py
├─ Script3.py
├─ ScriptPop.py
├─ ScriptFreq.py
├─ Frequency.txt
├─ Structure.txt
├─ temp.txt
├─ Pop.csv
```
Scenario #2 - Organized Steps

```
Project/
├─ Raw_Data/
│  ├─ Seq
│  ├─ Seq1
├─ Step1_Calculate_Freq/
│  ├─ ScriptFreq.py
│  ├─ Frequency.txt
├─ Step2_Simulate_Pop/
│  ├─ temp.txt
│  ├─ Pop.csv
│  ├─ ScriptPop.py
├─ Step3_Determine_Pop_Struct/
│  ├─ Step3.1_PrepareData/
│  │  ├─ Script2.py
│  │  ├─ Structure.txt
│  ├─ Step3.2_Analyze_Structure/
│  │  ├─ Script2Final.py
├─ Step4_Summaryize_Generate_Plots/
│  ├─ Analysis.xlsx
│  ├─ Script3.py
```

In Scenario 1, there isn't much structure and files aren't organized so you're not certain which order things should be or were processed.  In Scenario #2 there is a clear ordering - using folders to delineate the raw data and order of steps used.

We can even make it better by adding a README file or Project Summary document to the Project Folder that details the steps we took during the whole process.  

I recommend using text file written in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) or other document (Word, Pages, ...).  You can then keep track of the steps you've taken, any issues, and where you are on a project, what results you have. 

This sort of document allows you to come back to a project and understand your process and the results of the project - whether that is 5 years later or a couple weeks after a well deserved holiday. In addition, when it comes time to write the methods - you'll have a head start because all you'll need to do is to summarize what you already have.

Taking time up front before a project even begins to layout how you're going to organize the your scripts, data, and results can save you a lot of headaches in the months and years to come.


